By JOSHUA BROWN
Daily News-Record

HARRISONBURG — In the shuffle of online retailers and big-box stores, Mom and Pop shops seem to have all but fallen by the wayside.
But the family-owned business model hasn’t quite disappeared yet. Curt and Elizabeth Martin, co-owners of Martin’s Home Furnishings and Furnish 123, are proof of that.
The two have owned part of the business for about the last eight years, Curt Martin said. Owning a family store has its upsides and downs, he said, but the shop is doing OK for itself.
“Probably the biggest challenge is like in furniture you’re going up against big chain stores that have better buying power than we do,” he said. “But our advantage is we have lower overhead with our building our  warehouse. We try to be more customer friendly by sitting down with the customer and spending more time with them.”
Elizabeth, who leaves the day-to-day operations of Martin’s to her husband, helps make big decisions like sales. She is more involved with their budget furniture store, Furnish 123.
She said the stores will often place furniture orders together and have coordinated for a sale before. Because the family owns both stores, employees sometimes split their time between the locations, she said.
 
So You Want to Own a Business
According to Frank Tamberrino, president of the Harrisonburg-Rockingham Chamber of Commerce, the family-owned business model hasn’t really changed much in the last century. Mom and Pop stores often rely on a few employees — usually themselves — to fill a host of roles: bookkeeper, marketer, customer service and more, he said.
"The family business really hasn’t changed that much over time," he said. "You know, there’s obviously more competition both from the larger conglomerates as well as price pressures from foreign imports. But just in terms of the mechanics of running a business, most start off with an idea or talent or unique product that eventually gets too big for one person or a couple maybe grows a little bit. So, again, you won’t find many family business that are up in the 1,000, 1,500 employee range. Most of the ones you find in this category are going to be in the one or two person range. Maybe 100."
While technology has affected areas like how companies take stock or ring up customers, ultimately, running a family-owned business still comes down to selling products, he said. And whereas large corporations might not be as intimately acquainted with their customers, the mom-and-pop store are much more likely to be familiar with their patrons, "because every custoemer becomes that much more important bec a lot of times their reputation is on the line or the family name is on the line," he said.
He pointed out that chances that a family-owned and operated business will stay in the family decrease significantly with each generation. 


Colleen Grattan, daughter of Raymond Carr Jr., is one of those people who have kept the family business alive. She is the third-generation owner of Ray Carr Tires.
She started working at the store at a young age, but the automotive store isn't her only work experience. She took a few years after graduating from James Madison University in 1990 to explore the work world outside of her family store and then study abroad. Doing so, she said, gave her a greater appreciation for the family business.
"I think that's a really important thing," she said.
She then went to Eastern Mennonite University for a master's in business administration to help her prepare for taking over the family business. She and her husband, Eddie, bought the store two years ago from her father, who got it from his father in the late 1960s. Grattan's grandfather started it during World War II.
"[Getting her MBA] really gave me more tools to get involved deeper into the accounting and the financial end of the business," said Grattan. "Just because you are a family member born into a family business doesn't mean you are born with any business skills whatsoever. Just because you were born into the business, you might not be the entrepeneur that your father was your the salesman your father was."
As the owner, Grattan has kept the business focused on the customer, just as her grandfather did in the 40s. But, as Tamberrino said, a few things about the business have changed over the years.
"The customer service is done just like my granddaddy did it," said Grattan. "The customer is the most important thing, but the technical stuff has to be updated all the time."
One thing about owning a family business that Grattan has learned is that it is easy to carry work home with you. But it can be a little easier said than done, she says.


For Joe Hottinger, 58, who owns Harrisonburg-based Fat Daddie's Hot Rods, opening a small business started with a hobby from decades ago. One of his sons came to him several years ago and asked him to help with a Mustang he was working on. Soon, others saw the work the family had done and started asking them to take on restoration jobs.
"When my sons said 'Dad, I'd like to get into the hot rods like you used to be and I want to build my own,'" said Hottinger. "One had a mustang he was playing with. Then what happened was he built something for his own car and somebody would see it and they’d say 'Who did that?'"
One thing led to another and soon his son decided to quit his day job as an electrician to start working on cars. Now, Hottinger employs both his sons and his daughter, and work is booming.
"What we do is we restore original cars or we’ll build you a hot rod or we’ll customize a hot rod," he said. "We do it all right here. We take them down to the barebones."
As far as the business's succession, the family hasn't worked out the details, yet, he said, though they hope to nail that down soon "because I have three children and I want to be fair."

For those who are thinking of taking on a business, though, Tamberrino warned that it takes a lot of preparation to be ready.
"Running a business isn't really for everybody," he said. "There's some steps to take before hand in terms of putting your business plan together and doing your market research and really running through the mental process of 'Is this what I want to do?' before you take that plunge."

 
 
Contact Joshua Brown at 574-6218 or jbrown@dnronline.com


